---
layout: post
title: "On Stereotype Correction: Stop Treating Adults Like Children"
---

When it comes to people in this country dealing with stereotypes, it always makes me frustratingly amused.

In a word, if you care so much about equality and go out to command/ask/encourage everyone to maintain an "unbiased" point of view, you are bending it too hard. Perhaps it is you who are stereotyping a fairly important portion of people into victims.

Let me make myself clear, children are different than adults. We should treat children with extra care. But as they grow up, you start to treat them like adults, and only by treating them like adults can they finally take the role and be adults.

Stop treating adults like children. Treat children under 18 like children. As educators, maybe extend this limit to your early college students, but that's all. It is crucial they learn to do it in this phase and should be one of the most important lessons in college. After they graduate, let them deal with the world.

Making it straight and harsh and contradicting a lot of gut feelings, my point is as follows.

> When a group of people have a bad name about something/some skills, and one individual from this group does not share this common belief, it's not the responsibility of the general public/hiring institutes to change their opinions/decisions. On the contrary, it is the individual that should stand up, be an adult and take the responsibility to make clear s/he is not what they think s/he is.

<!--more-->

Ha, the second half is alright, maybe a bit heroic, but the first half sounds so wrong! Well, it certainly does for the whole generation of Americans who generally don't have to worry about how limited the nutrition in their meals is capped from the source, and how many eventually deadly chemicals they take in on a daily basis, and how weak they actually are against the corrupt, oppressive, manipulative and magically whimsical government. But think about it seriously and stop being a simple and everywhere-love-seeking kid, there is no easy path for anything. You have to personally do it, beat it, prove them wrong and get the respect. And in the long term, if there are enough number of exceptionally excellent individuals from that group (if there truly are enough, an unavoidable challenge), the general opinions will change themselves, unless this sector of business has terrible problems of communication, which thanks to modern technologies, is nearly impossible in this connected world - if there is such a sector, change the communication first, and let people decide on their own. **If you are still bending it, you are not being fair to provide equal opportunities. You have a biased opinion, which is a certain perceived ratio/extent, and you just want to make that happen as an outcome.** (Note that it might be a desirable goal for something that requires representation in nature, because of diverse group interests, but this rule has been already so much abused, that every institute feels obliged to starting count heads and maintain a ratio. Not every people related affair requires representation. It's a free market!)

If there is an observable statistically prominent behavior, which in many cases resides in people's general impression, there is no reason not to tentatively follow it. You don't always have to be buried in a literature survey to form an "unbiased" opinion; after all, we humans have evolved long enough to have more or less legitimate intuitions, or we could already have been eaten by what we eat today.

I'm a Chinese, so fewer people will be mad at me if I use the case of Chinese people as a negative example. If the general impression is that Chinese people in America speak poor English, or shall I say, on a statistical basis - meaning if you go to a conference, a supermarket or a restaurant and meet a Chinese, how certain you would find it hard to grasp the speaker's ideas and details, or to initiate a generic pleasant conversation, if you have to make a guess - that they say less fluent English than Caucasians, which may be highly likely, because of a few reasons I can readily enumerate: high head count of immigration, especially illegal, which ends up its route in [Chinese restaurants](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/10/13/cooka%C2%80%C2%99s-tale), their formation of closed circles with Chinese as their daily language, foreign graduate students with poor English education (despite many hours of reading and writing) who live in the States long enough (even if they return to their homeland after study) to add more to the general impression, etc., but I digress, I might as well take that into consideration with my decision making. It benefits me no matter who I am, a recruiter, or a Chinese myself.

If they do speak bad English in a general sense, and I am an HR and have limited time to pick a few people for sales representative positions out of a few thousands of resumes, what should I do? Ah ah, don't say the company should have given me more time, because first of all, it probably didn't and won't, and second, it perhaps shouldn't because they may think time could be better spent on other matters, which could be right. And don't say nowadays HRs are generally not capable of determining who will finally be an outstanding employee. Do you have a better solution, at the expense of the company resources? If I don't have a better algorithm, which I truly hope I do and will readily adopt if the outcome is promising, I'm highly likely to screen them by more American-y, or let's be straight, anglicized or Europe-origin names, if it's between 500 "Zhi Liu"s (which is my name) and 500 "Bryan Cranston"s, and I'll tell the ones that keep lecturing me "you have to be unbiased!" to shut the [F] up, because they have no respect, no responsibility and no better solution for my situation. Hiring people is my job, and if I do it wrong, I endanger the longevity of my own company, which not only pays me, but also is a piece of great work of efforts on its own. And don't tell me "just try to, and as long as you try, you are OK". I don't want to lie to myself, and I wish to be realistically satisfied. If my strategy at the time is the best I can think of, there should be nothing to make me feel bad, and I won't try to morally correct myself on something I cannot potentially reach. **That's hypocrisy; that's self-censorship, usually under a larger established oppressive censorship, which in China as we say, makes you a "shitizen".**

Having the experience-driven "biased" impression has another benefit even if the ones you are about to hire do not speak well. Speaking poorly does not necessarily mean s/he cannot carry on highly intellectual tasks. Software, engineering, medical, financial industries and the academia know this as a fact and they benefit from it by having the expectation that just because someone does not speak well, it does not mean s/he is bad at what s/he does, and listen more carefully for their own good. But if the speaker is too poor at conveying his/her thoughts, which happens very often because the precise choice of words and grammar is crucial to one's understanding of a technical subject, who should the speaker blame? **I don't see there is any other way to improve the situation but let him/her get down to it, drill and see if there is any improvement in the future. This is hardcore heroic; this is a demonstration of human spirit, and can trigger my deepest respect and empathy.** Don't cry out loud and try to change the buyers' rightfully high expectations, which is exactly why they stand out in the market and provide you with the potential job opportunities.

If on the other hand, you as an individual speak excellent English, you will change others' minds by action, and let them re-evaluate their future decisions. If you receive more attention than you wanted because of this, don't blame them, but take it as something for you to overcome, because they did not do anything to make you one of that group, and no one is **supposed to** get along with anyone - wow that sounds awfully not nice and ungrateful! **My friend, this is about the principles on freedom. The line should be drawn clear. Without it, how are you sure you are not imposed upon when you do your own business?** I hate to address it this way, just as you hate to listen to a harsh and long-winded court debate. But we rely on that as a society.

Any opinion obtained from singular cases is not believable as a general rule. These are the words people-against-stereotypes would use to educate everyone. Let me give the same words back to them. There are stories that a Chinese man used an American-y name and got far more job offers, and the moral of the story is "1. everyone, wake up! You are wrong about the Chinese speaking English! 2. Look at this unfair world! I did something so simple and the advantage is so disproportionate and unjustified! Don't judge me by my name/ethnicity!" Right on the contrary: **1. your own exceptional ability does not represent the majority level of the group in America. 2. If this simple thing you did can make you stand out, there are surely other simple and sophisticated ways you can think of to obtain the same effect.** And I mean, you do speak well and are fully capable of the job you are applying for, right? Or why are you saying all this to me? To me, this is a perfect chance to improvise (within legal and moral boundaries) - you try to come up with better and faster ways of communication and making impressions, and you raise the chance of getting the job. Your employers will also thank you for this, because they can know a lot about you faster. Too many people applying for it? Go find another one that best suits your talents/skills, those demanding enough to make you stand out so that people see you as different.

Adults prefer to be acknowledged individually, rather than getting the satisfaction from being one of a certain group. But first, you have to prove your exception, you have to impress, and if it is your exceptional talents/skills that lead you to a certain high-end group, well I guess you can be mildly happy about it.

Adults also need to be able to withstand pressure. If just filling out the checkboxes of gender and race startles you so you have a dramatic decrease in your ability to cope with tasks, it does not tell me "people, stop being mean!" On the contrary, it tells me you need some extra workout, you need to get in the real game. Too much care in a greenhouse may make better veggies, but only more vulnerable people. And, it seems to be fairly popular nowadays to appear vulnerable.

Well kid, toughen up. Don't let people frame you into victims when you can make eye-opening progress as an individual, and within you lies the great human spirit that first will transform you, and then others' perceptions of whatever group you are of. At that time, you'll be one of the few who can actually (re-)define those groups, if you freely choose to, as always.